chore: add writing plugins learn section (#361)
modernweb-dev/web: docs/learn/test-runner/writing-plugins.md

  order: 70
---

Not every use case will be covered by existing plugins 😱

> Therefore if you encounter a situation that requires some custom adjustments you can create a plugin yourself.

Reviewer: Paragraphs should be separated be a newline, or the text should be continuous. Introducing a manual line break will break up the text uneven on different breakpoints.

That goes for this, but als other paragraphs below.

Author: not as far as I know? 🤔

single newlines are ignored and it's the same as to keep writing in a single line but you get the benefit that diffs are nicer (as each sentense has a separate line)

if you need a line break then you need to add a `br`

Reviewer: Aah, you're right. Sorry!

> ## Use case dependencies

Reviewer: This title isn't really clear to me.

Author: changed to `Testing a tooltip`

We would like to create a tooltip that is responsive.
Doing something like that from scratch might not be a good idea as there are many edge cases in regards to positioning.

We decided to use a popular package called [popper.js](https://popper.js.org/).

To get started we install it from npm

```bash
npm i @popperjs/core
```

> then we created a test file in accordance with popper documentation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then we create a test file in accordance with popper documentation
```

👉 `test/tooltip.test.js`

```js
import { expect, fixture, html } from '@open-wc/testing';
import { createPopper } from '@popperjs/core';

it('can use popper', async () => {
  const wrapper = await fixture(html`
    <div>
      <button id="button" aria-describedby="tooltip">I'm a button</button>
      <div id="tooltip" role="tooltip">I'm a tooltip</div>
    </div>
  `);

  const button = wrapper.querySelector('#button');
  const tooltip = wrapper.querySelector('#tooltip');

  createPopper(button, tooltip, {
    placement: 'right',
  });
});
```

> when we execute it we hover get an error 🤔

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we execute it we hover get an error 🤔
```

```bash
$ npm run test

> web-test-runner "test/**/*.test.js" --node-resolve

test/tooltip.test.js:

 ❌ can use popper
      at: node_modules/@popperjs/core/lib/index.js:81:9
      ReferenceError: process is not defined
        at Object.setOptions (node_modules/@popperjs/core/lib/index.js:81:9)
        at createPopper (node_modules/@popperjs/core/lib/index.js:215:14)
        at n.<anonymous> (test/tooltip.test.js:25:3)
```

If you are often using es modules directly in the browser then `ReferenceError: process is not defined` might sound familiar.
Many libraries sadly decide to publish their code only run-able in node or via a bundler.

> There is simply no `process` variable set within a browser.

Reviewer: I don't think it's *that* common, I've 

Maybe something like:

Some packages use the global `process.env` variable to check for environment variable. This variable is available in node, but not in the browser.

Author: changed

> We can, however `fake it` but writing a custom plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can, however "fake it" but writing a custom plugin.
```

## Configuration file

> Plugins can be added via the configuration file `web-test-runner.config.js`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Plugins can be added via the configuration file `web-test-runner.config.mjs`.
```

> In there you can define all the options you know from the cli within a js file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In there you can define all the options you know from the CLI within a JS file.
```

> For example, set the files to be used and to enable nodeResolve.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, set the test files and enable the `nodeResolve` option.
```

```js
export default {
  files: 'test/**/*.test.js',
  nodeResolve: true,
};
```

Doing that means that your `package.json` script can become shorter

```json
"scripts": {
  "test": "web-test-runner",
  "test:watch": "web-test-runner --watch"
},
```

## Transform context

Plugins offer various hook into how code gets found, handled, and served.
For our case the `transform` hook is useful.

To understand what is going on we add a `hello world` plugin via an object to the plugins array.

Each plugin gets passed on the koa context which has some useful details

- `path`: server file path to the currently processing file
- `body`: string of the currently processing file

> - `is('<Content-Type>')`: to check the Content-Type of to the currently processing file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `is('<Content-Type>')`: to check the Content-Type of the file that is currently being processed
```

> - `headers`: Object of the html request headers including for example `host`, `referer`, ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `headers`: Object of the request headers including for example `host`, `referer`, ...
```

- see [koas docs](https://koajs.com/#context) for more info about the api of context

In our case, the `path` is probably the most interesting. Let's log it.

```js
export default {
  files: 'test/**/*.test.js',
  nodeResolve: true,
  plugins: [
    {
      name: 'provide-process',
      transform(context) {
        console.log('hello world');
        console.log(context.path);
      },
    },
  ],
};
```

If we run our tests now we get a long list of `hello world` and the path to the file.

```bash
hello world
/
hello world
/node_modules/@popperjs/core/lib/utils/detectOverflow.js
hello world
/node_modules/@popperjs/core/lib/dom-utils/getOffsetParent.js
hello world
/node_modules/@popperjs/core/lib/dom-utils/getDocumentElement.js
hello world
/node_modules/@popperjs/core/lib/dom-utils/getComputedStyle.js
hello world
/node_modules/@open-wc/testing-helpers/src/fixture-no-side-effect.js
hello world
/node_modules/@popperjs/core/lib/utils/getOppositePlacement.js
```

> most interesting is actually the `/` root here and if we console log the body

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most interesting is actually the `/` root here and if we console log the body
```

```js
if (context.path === '/') {
  console.log({
    path: context.path,
    body: context.body,
  });
}
```

we get

```
{
  path: '/',
  body: '<!DOCTYPE html>\n' +
    '<html>\n' +
    '  <head></head>\n' +
    '  <body>\n' +
    '    <script type="module">\n' +
    "      import('/__web-test-runner__/test-framework/[...]/node_modules/@web/test-runner-mocha/dist/autorun.js').catch((error) => {\n" +
    '        console.error(error);\n' +
    "        console.error('\u001b[31mThe test framework could not be loaded. Are your dependencies installed correctly? Is there a server plugin or middleware that interferes?\u001b[39m');\n" +
    '      });\n' +
    '    </script>\n' +
    '  </body>\n' +
    '</html>'
}
```

## Writing a plugin for process is not defined

> Now we know that `web-test-runner` serves its start html via `/` and we can use that to do additional modifications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we know that web test runner serves the test HTML page via `/` and we can use that to do additional modifications.
```

Our original problem is still `ReferenceError: process is not defined` which we can solve by defining it for the browser.

> But how can we do this? adding an extra script tag could be enough?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But how can we do this? Adding an extra script tag could be enough?
```

```html
<script>
  window.process = { env: { NODE_ENV: 'development' } };
</script>
```

In order to insert this snippet, we can us a transform plugin and insert it right into the header.

```js
export default {
  files: 'test/**/*.test.js',
  nodeResolve: true,
  plugins: [
    {
      name: 'provide-process',
      transform(context) {
        if (context.path === '/') {
          const transformedBody = context.body.replace(
            '</head>',
            '<script>window.process = { env: { NODE_ENV: "development" } }</script></head>',
          );
          return transformedBody;
        }
      },
    },
  ],
};
```

With that, we are finally green 💪

```
Chrome: |██████████████████████████████| 1/1 test files | 1 passed, 0 failed

Finished running tests in 1.3s, all tests passed! 🎉
```

Often when using 3rd party npm dependencies the code might not work out of the box in a browser.
With this plugin we however made it possible to run popper directly in the browser and therefore also within our test runner.

> ## Use case mocking API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Mocking API responses
```

> Next up we are having a helper function that can get meta information from users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next up we are have a helper function that can get meta information from users.
```

Author: changed

> This function requires an api as it will fetch a REST json endpoint while in production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This function requires an API as it will fetch a REST JSON endpoint while in production.
```

The test is checking if the data you get is correct.

👉 `test/getUser.test.js`

```js
it('can get meta data via a userId', async () => {
  const user3 = await getUser(3);

>   expect(user3.name).to.qual('Lea');

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  expect(user3.name).to.equal('Lea');
```

  const user10 = await getUser(10);

>   expect(user10.name).to.qual('Peter');

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  expect(user10.name).to.equal('Peter');
```

});
```

> Now when we implement we use fetch to actually toggle the api endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now when we implement this function, we use fetch to make a request to the API endpoint.
```

👉 `src/getUser.js`

```js
export async function getUser(userId) {
  const response = await fetch(`/api/users/${userId}`);
  const data = await response.json();
  return data;
}
```

> When we start the test we do get an expected error.

Reviewer: Not sure if you meant expected or unexpected here :D

```suggestion
When we start the test we do get an unexpected error.
```

```
test/getUser.test.js:

 🚧 404 network requests:
    - api/users/3

 ❌ can get meta data via a userId
      SyntaxError: Unexpected token N in JSON at position 0
```

The url `api/users/3` returned `404` which means the file could not be found.

> Also, our json parsing failed as the `404` page has `Not Found` as its body.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, our JSON parsing failed as the `404` page has `Not Found` as its body.
```

> And `Not Found` is not valid json 😅

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And `Not Found` is not valid JSON 😅
```

To create virtual files we can use the `serve` plugin hook.

> In there again you have access to the `koa context`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In there again you have access to the Koa context.
```

> By default the file extension is used to infer the mime type to respond with.

As we are using no file extension at all we need to return an object with a `type` property to set it explicitly.

```js
export default {
  files: 'test/**/*.test.js',
  nodeResolve: true,
  plugins: [
    {
      name: 'mock-api',
      serve(context) {
        if (context.path === '/api/users/3') {
          return { body: '{ "name": "Lea" }', type: 'json' };
        }
        if (context.path === '/api/users/10') {
          return { body: '{ "name": "Peter" }', type: 'json' };
        }
      },
    },
  ],

> };

Reviewer: This is not actually what a plugin is for, the serve hook is for serving files. You're actually responding with an API request. That's what middleware are for.

Reviewer: But it's also not wrong, and maybe it's a nice convenience way to do it.

Author: hmmm if that is not how we should do it then we need to make clear why? (I didn't get it apparently 🙈)

what is the difference to a middelware? when should you use a middelware? when a plugin?

right now we don't even teach about middleware at all 😅 
I thought we encourage to always use plugins 🤔

Author: added a note
